<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Appendix</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="appendix" epub:type="appendix">
			<h2>
				<span epub:type="title">Appendix: Fragment of the Mystery of Edwin Drood</span>
			</h2>
			<p>When Forster was just finishing his biography of Dickens, he found among the leaves of one of the novelist’s other manuscripts certain loose slips in his writing, “on paper only half the size of that used for the tale, so cramped, interlined, and blotted as to be nearly illegible.” These proved, upon examination, to contain a suggested chapter for <i>Edwin Drood</i>, in which Sapsea, the auctioneer, appears as the principal figure, surrounded by a group of characters new to the story. That chapter, being among the last things Dickens wrote, seems to contain so much of interest that it may be well to reprint it here.⁠—<small>ED.</small></p>
			<h3>HOW MR. SAPSEA CEASED TO BE A MEMBER OF THE EIGHT CLUB<br/>
			<small>TOLD BY HIMSELF</small></h3>
			<p>Wishing to take the air, I proceeded by a circuitous route to the Club, it being our weekly night of meeting. I found that we mustered our full strength. We were enrolled under the denomination of the Eight Club. We were eight in number; we met at eight o’clock during eight months of the year; we played eight games of four-handed cribbage, at eightpence the game; our frugal supper was composed of eight rolls, eight mutton chops, eight pork sausages, eight baked potatoes, eight marrowbones, with eight toasts, and eight bottles of ale. There may, or may not, be a certain harmony of colour in the ruling idea of this (to adopt a phrase of our lively neighbours) reunion. It was a little idea of mine.</p>
			<p>A somewhat popular member of the Eight Club, was a member by the name of Kimber. By profession, a dancing-master. A commonplace, hopeful sort of man, wholly destitute of dignity or knowledge of the world.</p>
			<p>As I entered the Clubroom, Kimber was making the remark: “And he still half-believes him to be very high in the Church.”</p>
			<p>In the act of hanging up my hat on the eighth peg by the door, I caught Kimber’s visual ray. He lowered it, and passed a remark on the next change of the moon. I did not take particular notice of this at the moment, because the world was often pleased to be a little shy of ecclesiastical topics in my presence. For I felt that I was picked out (though perhaps only through a coincidence) to a certain extent to represent what I call our glorious constitution in Church and State. The phrase may be objected to by cautious minds; but I own to it as mine. I threw it off in argument some little time back. I said: “O<small>UR</small> G<small>LORIOUS</small> C<small>ONSTITUTION</small> in C<small>HURCH</small> and S<small>TATE</small>.”</p>
			<p>Another member of the Eight Club was Peartree; also member of the Royal College of Surgeons. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Peartree is not accountable to me for his opinions, and I say no more of them here than that he attends the poor gratis whenever they want him, and is not the parish doctor. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Peartree may justify it to the grasp of <i>his</i> mind thus to do his republican utmost to bring an appointed officer into contempt. Suffice it that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Peartree can never justify it to the grasp of <i>mine</i>.</p>
			<p>Between Peartree and Kimber there was a sickly sort of feebleminded alliance. It came under my particular notice when I sold off Kimber by auction. (Goods taken in execution.) He was a widower in a white under-waistcoat, and slight shoes with bows, and had two daughters not ill-looking. Indeed the reverse. Both daughters taught dancing in scholastic establishments for Young Ladies⁠—had done so at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Sapsea’s; nay, Twinkleton’s⁠—and both, in giving lessons, presented the unwomanly spectacle of having little fiddles tucked under their chins. In spite of which, the younger one might, if I am correctly informed⁠—I will raise the veil so far as to say I <small>KNOW</small> she might⁠—have soared for life from this degrading taint, but for having the class of mind allotted to what I call the common herd, and being so incredibly devoid of veneration as to become painfully ludicrous.</p>
			<p>When I sold off Kimber without reserve, Peartree (as poor as he can hold together) had several prime household lots knocked down to him. I am not to be blinded; and of course it was as plain to me what he was going to do with them, as it was that he was a brown hulking sort of revolutionary subject who had been in India with the soldiers, and ought (for the sake of society) to have his neck broke. I saw the lots shortly afterwards in Kimber’s lodgings⁠—through the window⁠—and I easily made out that there had been a sneaking pretence of lending them till better times. A man with a smaller knowledge of the world than myself might have been led to suspect that Kimber had held back money from his creditors, and fraudulently bought the goods. But, besides that I knew for certain he had no money, I knew that this would involve a species of forethought not to be made compatible with the frivolity of a caperer, inoculating other people with capering, for his bread.</p>
			<p>As it was the first time I had seen either of those two since the sale, I kept myself in what I call Abeyance. When selling him up, I had delivered a few remarks⁠—shall I say a little homily?⁠—concerning Kimber, which the world did regard as more than usually worth notice. I had come up into my pulpit, it was said, uncommonly like⁠—and a murmur of recognition had repeated his (I will not name whose) title, before I spoke. I had then gone on to say that all present would find, in the first page of the catalogue that was lying before them, in the last paragraph before the first lot, the following words: “Sold in pursuance of a writ of execution issued by a creditor.” I had then proceeded to remind my friends, that however frivolous, not to say contemptible, the business by which a man got his goods together, still his goods were as dear to him, and as cheap to society (if sold without reserve), as though his pursuits had been of a character that would bear serious contemplation. I had then divided my text (if I may be allowed so to call it) into three heads: firstly, Sold; secondly, In pursuance of a writ of execution; thirdly, Issued by a creditor; with a few moral reflections on each, and winding up with, “Now to the first lot” in a manner that was complimented when I afterwards mingled with my hearers.</p>
			<p>So, not being certain on what terms I and Kimber stood, I was grave, I was chilling. Kimber, however, moving to me, I moved to Kimber. (I was the creditor who had issued the writ. Not that it matters.)</p>
			<p>“I was alluding, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sapsea,” said Kimber, “to a stranger who entered into conversation with me in the street as I came to the Club. He had been speaking to you just before, it seemed, by the churchyard; and though you had told him who you were, I could hardly persuade him that you were not high in the Church.”</p>
			<p>“Idiot?” said Peartree.</p>
			<p>“Ass!” said Kimber.</p>
			<p>“Idiot and Ass!” said the other five members.</p>
			<p>“Idiot and Ass, gentlemen,” I remonstrated, looking around me, “are strong expressions to apply to a young man of good appearance and address.” My generosity was roused; I own it.</p>
			<p>“You’ll admit that he must be a Fool,” said Peartree.</p>
			<p>“You can’t deny that he must be a Blockhead,” said Kimber.</p>
			<p>Their tone of disgust amounted to being offensive. Why should the young man be so calumniated? What had he done? He had only made an innocent and natural mistake. I controlled my generous indignation, and said so.</p>
			<p>“Natural?” repeated Kimber. “<em>He’s</em> a Natural!”</p>
			<p>The remaining six members of the Eight Club laughed unanimously. It stung me. It was a scornful laugh. My anger was roused in behalf of an absent, friendless stranger. I rose (for I had been sitting down).</p>
			<p>“Gentlemen,” I said with dignity, “I will not remain one of this Club allowing opprobrium to be cast on an unoffending person in his absence. I will not so violate what I call the sacred rites of hospitality. Gentlemen, until you know how to behave yourselves better, I leave you. Gentlemen, until then I withdraw, from this place of meeting, whatever personal qualifications I may have brought into it. Gentlemen, until then you cease to be the Eight Club, and must make the best you can of becoming the Seven.”</p>
			<p>I put on my hat and retired. As I went downstairs I distinctly heard them give a suppressed cheer. Such is the power of demeanour and knowledge of mankind. I had forced it out of them.</p>
			<h3>II</h3>
			<p>Whom should I meet in the street, within a few yards of the door of the inn where the Club was held, but the selfsame young man whose cause I had felt it my duty so warmly⁠—and I will add so disinterestedly⁠—to take up.</p>
			<p>“Is it <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sapsea,” he said doubtfully, “or is it⁠—”</p>
			<p>“It is <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sapsea,” I replied.</p>
			<p>“Pardon me, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sapsea; you appear warm, sir.”</p>
			<p>“I have been warm,” I said, “and on your account.” Having stated the circumstances at some length (my generosity almost overpowered him), I asked him his name.</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sapsea,” he answered, looking down, “your penetration is so acute, your glance into the souls of your fellow men is so penetrating, that if I was hardly enough to deny that my name is Poker, what would it avail me?”</p>
			<p>I don’t know that I had quite exactly made out to a fraction that his name <i>was</i> Poker, but I daresay I had been pretty near doing it.</p>
			<p>“Well, well,” said I, trying to put him at his ease by nodding my head in a soothing way. “Your name is Poker, and there is no harm in being named Poker.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sapsea!” cried the young man, in a very well-behaved manner. “Bless you for those words!” He then, as if ashamed of having given way to his feelings, looked down again.</p>
			<p>“Come Poker,” said I, “let me hear more about you. Tell me. Where are you going to, Poker? and where do you come from?”</p>
			<p>“Ah <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Sapsea!” exclaimed the young man. “Disguise from you is impossible. You know already that I come from somewhere, and am going somewhere else. If I was to deny it, what would it avail me?”</p>
			<p>“Then don’t deny it,” was my remark.</p>
			<p>“Or,” pursued Poker, in a kind of despondent rapture, “or if I was to deny that I came to this town to see and hear you, sir, what would it avail me? Or if I was to deny⁠—”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
